So so far we've been working with format,
with pointers,
with a little bit about back caches.
Let's add one more topic to it and
let's talk about file management.
How can we, for example, read and
write files that we can use for
text based files, for JSON, for XML?
And of course you can then extend
that to binary files as well.
And for that,
we are going to create another project.
Can we reuse the same one?
I mean we can, the problem is that you
cannot have more than one main function.
So to actually play with a lot
of project in one project,
you need to start doing
weird things like this,
so then because it's not a dot go anymore,
the compiler will not find it.
The problem is that if the compiler finds
another Go file that has a main, so
I'm talking about just changing or using
any weird extension, so then the compiler
will say, no, no, that's not a Go file,
I'm not going to look into that one.
Okay, so
what I mean is that most of the time it's
better to just create a new project.
We know it's not a big deal,
we can do it faster every time.
Okay, so I open a new folder,
we are going to work with files.
We can call this files.
And we know that the next
step is to open the terminal.
And say go, mode init and a name such
as frontendmasters.com/go/ and
we can call this files.
And when it's done we create a new file
main.go with package main, func main.
It always the same, and
now you're ready to create a new package.
So in this case,
we are going to create a package.
So let's remember how to create a package.
I will wait also a couple of seconds so
you can get there.
But remember,
a package is just a folder with one name.
It doesn't matter the name of the folder,
and then a name inside it.
If we create the folder here,
let's say for example,
we call the folder filemanagement,
something like that.
Is that the name of the package?
Actually no,
the name of the package is when we have
let's create the file reader and
your file writer.
The name of the package will
be whatever you put here.
So you can put x, this is package x.
Well now that's the name of the package,
and
all the files in the folder
must have the same name,okay.
But the file system name doesn't
need to match the package name.
Typically we try to match them, okay,
but actually there is no need, right?
And also that means that I can change
the name of the folder at any time and
it's not going to change
anything in our code, okay?
I'm not going to call it package x,
we can call it file management,
file utils,
however you wanna call this, it's fine.
This is a reader, so
we're going to read the file.
So we will have a function read file.
And we will get the file name as a string,
and we are going to return the context of
that string so we can call that read text
file because it's going to be a text file.
Remember, these are input arguments and
these are output arguments.
That sometimes is one, but
we know it can be more than one, okay, and
we will see if maybe we wannahave
another argument in a second.
So how to work with files.
First, to work with files, we need to
use a package from the standard library.
So if we go to Go Docs,
Standard Library, we can go and
find which is the package
that we need to use.
We can search for file here and
see if we can find something
that explained to us that
is reading file premise if
file is to global the general,
actually is IO util.
That's how you get there.
Also we have FS for file system.
So FS is to actually,
for example, read the contents
of a folder, create a directory.
But if you wanna work with the contents
of a file, it's an IO util.
So you get into IO utils, and here you
have, for example, how to read the file,
how to write the file, and
if you get there, you see the signature.
And before writing the code,
how many arguments do we have here?
Question for you, how many
arguments do we have in read file?
One.
How many return values do we have?
Two.
Remember, this is return, and
it's returning two values.
The first one is a slice of byte,
and then we have error.
That's the design pattern for
error management.
So then to use that, by the way,
it says deprecated because there
is a newer version cuz we can call OS read
file, we can use that one if you want.
So instead of doing that we say okay by
the way, typically we have examples so
we can use the IO util version of the OS,
it's just the same,
it's not going to make any difference.
We can use the OS one if you want.
Read file, it's just the same, you can
see the signature is the same signature,
they change where they store that file.
Well, the name of the file,
we receive that as an argument,
and then we just start this
into two variables, remember,
and we can create them with bar or
we can use a shortcut.
And say, well, we have the content and
a possible error that typically
would call that error, err, but
it's just a variable name, so any name
will work, that's kind of the way to work.
And then we check if it's nil or
if it's not nil.
So if we do have an error,
then we need to do something.
If not, we do something else.
So in this case if we are here is
because we couldn't read the file.
This is read operation successful.
Okay, makes sense?
So the question is let's talk about
what happens if we have the value,
what if we have the value
we need to return and
we're going to return what,
content, right?
That's the variable with information.
But what do we want to do if
the operating system says, you know what,
I couldn't read the file, or
you don't have permission, or
the path doesn't exist or
something happened.
You were reading a USB drive and
someone disconnected the drive,
something happened so it didn't work.
So from a Go point of view, it's up to us.
So Go says, it's your problem,
we have three ways to solve the problem.
You pick the one you prefer, let's say
the lazy version is to
return empty string.
The premise is that the color
will never know why it's empty.
Is it because the file is empty?
Actually we don't know, right?
So that's kind of a problem.
Also, we have an error here,
it's saying, hey,
you cannot use the variable of type,
slice of byte as a string,
which maybe is true.
It's not the same, right, type.
Well, we can actually create
a string from an array
of bytes using UTF8 by
using this converter.
Does it make sense?
It's pretty simple, that part was simple.
Again, this is the lazy version,
I'm not sure I like it.
One of the things you can do, well,
you can also panic, remember panic?
You like that one, you like to panic.
So you can panic like that.
>> [LAUGH]
>> [LAUGH] Yeah, I cannot do anything, so
I'm panicking, okay?
Or we can continue the same design
pattern up in the code stack.
So instead of returning the string,
we can return the string or an error.
Does that make sense?
So in this case, now it's giving
me an error here because I need to
return an error that can be
nil because it was okay here.
So we add the comma nil, and
if we couldn't read the file,
then we return nil as the first argument.
And we can bypass the same error here,
like so.
By the way, the type have a problem here.
That's not the type that was the name
of my variable, actually is error,
that's a type error.
Now it's giving me an error here over
the nil, saying the string cannot be nil,
because a nil string is
actually an empty string.
Here we have two options.
I will use the lazy option here,
give me that for a second,
because we will use the other
option on the next sample.
So for strings, we don't have nils,
there is a way to solve that,
and that is to actually
return a pointer to a string.
But for now, let's say because
we're not going to use that, okay?
For now, believe me that that will work.
So it's complaining that it's on use.
This isn't a package reader, right?
What if I wanna use this from main.go,
what are the steps?
First, will it work?
I haven't seen it, why?
Why no, why this?
>> You need to import it.
>> I need to import it,
okay, in main.go, right?
>> Yes, or you would've to capitalize it.
>> Exactly, I need to capitalize it
because if I look at that function,
I know it's private to my package,
so I need to use capital R, okay?
That's the first step.
Now, after I've done that you can see that
it's not complaining anymore that no one
is using it.
Because it says okay, no one is using
it right now in this package, but
maybe because we are exporting
that I won't complain,
because maybe someone else from
the outside will use that, okay?
If it's here, there is something wrong,
it says, hey, you're not using it locally,
and from the outside no one can actually
access that, so maybe we have a problem.
So that's the warning.
So now from here,
can I try to use it directly like read?
Well, we should actually start trying
to get the package is fileutils.
Can I try fileutils and press return?
So I start typing the name of my folder,
actually the name of my package,
not [LAUGH] the folder.
And it's fileutils, and
you can see at the bottom that's
actually what is going to import.
It has the prefix of my module's name and
then the package.
And then read text file, and
then let's say when I read a file so
I can create the folder here, maybe
create another folder there called data,
and I'm going to create a file which
shall have some text, text txt.
I'm a content of a text file, just
a text file,and I will try to read that.
By the way, I will refactor this,
just a warning.
So I would say data/text.txt.
A couple of questions that
may arise at this point,
will the compiler think that
data is now a package or not?
Can I create folders without Go files?
So because we mentioned that the package
is a folder, so can I make this?
Well actually,
the compiler will only check for go files.
The compiler will ignore everything else.
The compiler doesn't know about
other files, doesn't care.
So if you have folders,
empty folders, it will ignore them.
If you have folders with content that
is not go files, doesn't matter, okay?
Typically, you don't mix source
code with data with assets,
we have them separated on a real project,
okay?
But for now, we are just playing,
I can try to read that.
And by the way,
what are we getting from here?
Two values, right?
Remember, always two values.
So we can call this,
this is the contents, and error.
And we can try if error is not nil,
we can call format,
fmt, and say Println c.
And if not,
we can use a Printf with format and
say ERROR PANIC and
then we can put the value,
and the value can be the error object, so
we can see the details of what happened.
So this is the pattern that
you will typically see when
you're executing functions
that might not end properly.
Your wizard receive two values, so
you will see this pattern a lot.
What if you don't care?
Like you know what, if it doesn't matter,
I will just don't care about the error.
I will just move on with an empty
string because you want to.
Remember you can also
use the underscore here.
Of course, in that case,
I can actually now read for the error...
But if you do that, then if you
don't care, you can just ignore
the second argument and just continue
with whatever C you have, okay?
So if I try this, I already
mentioned that I will refactor this.
Because if I try this,
it says ERROR PANIC, nil, okay?
So what's going on here?
That we were guessing that,
this go file is being executed
in the current folder and
then the path is relative
to the current folder.
So actually doesn't help this work,
I need to parse an absolute path.
So from my computer where that text
file is actually right now, okay?
Do you understand the problem?
So what we need is to ask the OS
about the current folder.
So it's not a big deal, and
for that we have an OS,
the same OS that we were using
before operating system.
You can see that all the functions
are capitalized, why?
Because they're exported.
If I see them, [LAUGH] It's
because they must be capitalized.
And we do have a getWD.
The name doesn't say
a lot actually by itself,
that it's currently the working directory,
the current working directory.
So this is giving me the current
working directory and
current working directory
if I try to see it,
it returns the directory and error, okay?
So actually it's the same thing.
So I can get this is the,
let's say the root path and the error.
If I don't care about the error,
I can just say this.
Why?
Because I feel at this point that having
an error to get the current working
directory is not really common.
Again, we are situations you're
running your Go file from
an external hard drive and
then it's in memory, and
then you remove the hard drive while
the software is still in memory.
So then when it tries to read, the working
directory is not there anymore,
it's kind of weird.
Okay, so it's not gonna happen, so
I will just say, I don't care about there.
And then you can take that root path.
And we also need to add a forward slash to
separate the root path from the text file.
So the other problem that we have
is that we need to swap conditions.
Because right now if the error is not nil,
is because we do
have an error, so
I need to swap these two expressions or
verify if it's nil is because
we don't have an error, okay?
And then if I try this now I can
see the contents of the file here.
After this, instead of sending
that to the console, you can, for
example, parse the JSON,
we will see how to do that.
You can parse,
it can be a CSV to parse a comma
separated value file or
do something with that.
But that, for example,
how to work and read a file.